when i don't deserve something and it
happens
anyway it reprograms
my understanding of what is deserved and
what is not deserved
and then i carry that programming
through life
which is where you carry the identity of
shame
would dr k make a video about shame i've
recently come to realize that my social
anxiety and low self-esteem is rooted
in a core of feeling of shame and not
the circumstances around me i say
feeling because
as much as it is a belief i am bad it's
also
an this overwhelming sensation that
seems to hijack my life
i can't remember much about my childhood
so it is hard to identify if this
is something that was learned but i felt
this way my whole life
therapy has been slow but helpful but my
therapist
seems to focus mostly on a cvt driven
approach
the problem with this is that i struggle
with an overwhelming emotion sensation
and not so much a thought
feeling shame makes me feel even more
ashamed
you know this is why this is why shame
is the elite mob
of emotions it's really the best emotion
that makes you feel more of the emotion
and when the shame gets bad enough it
leads to anger hatred self-sabotage and
inability to hold relationships that is
right
um things that i'm curious about how
core
shame becomes implanted in our minds and
what it really is
if understanding the origins of our
shame can help us overcome it and if so
how
notable physiological patterns that
might serve as helpful tools to overcome
shame meditative approaches this has
been a slow grind for me and one of the
biggest things that
keeps me going is listening to dr k
break down these topics
okay thank you and take care you are
very welcome and thank you for posting
i think friends it is teaching time can
you all hold on a second
i'd like to blame my children but today
i have only myself to blame
so let's talk about shame so you know
i'll ask i'll say things like
become aware of it notice it notice what
you feel see where the hurt is coming
from
so i want you all to pay attention to
this sentence first i've recently come
to realize that my social anxiety and
low self-esteem is rooted in a core
feeling of shame
and not the circumstances around me this
is a huge step forward okay
and this is why i think this person is
already getting better because they've
come to realize
that what shame so shame is tricky okay
so the first thing to understand about
shame is that it's a tricky tricky
tricky tricky tricky one the first thing
with shame is that shame comes from
within
but it's sneaky sneaky one because
it tricks you into thinking it comes
from outside
so this is the first thing to understand
about shane
and this actually is the the thing that
leads to the most stumbling
because if i assume that shame
is coming from the outside then the
solution is on the outside but like so
let's say like
you know let's say once again like an
abusive relationship okay so if i'm in
an abusive relationship with someone
who's emotionally abusive and makes me
feel ashamed of myself
what i will wind up doing is trying to
appease that person
because that person kind of controls the
lever on whether i feel ashamed or don't
feel ashamed
right so then what happens is i wind up
doing like all these kinds of appeasing
behaviors and then like it just
propagates
the the negative experience okay
so that's the first thing to understand
about shane so if you want to overcome
shame the first you the first step is to
try to figure out you know your mind
will be telling you
you aren't as smart
good competent likable
lovable etc you take your pick
right and then what it'll do is it'll
cite evidence
to that effect you'll say because oh
look at that person
you see he got a better you got better
grades than you did
this person is more likable this person
is more competent this person is better
looking
so once again as we sort of talked about
you know once you have an emotion it
hijacks
your thinking your rational mind and
then what happens is it mis-attributes
it misassigns where the problem lies
because then like if all of these things
are true on the outside
then you really do deserve to be ashamed
of yourself okay that's the first thing
to understand about shane
you know like where does this come from
so what shame
is i know it sounds kind of weird but we
think about shame as an emotion right
so like we think like you know emotions
include shame
anger you know fear etc
and so i know it sounds kind of weird
but then our approach is like okay how
do i stop feeling this emotion whereas
we actually don't we can't stop feeling
an emotion like i know it sounds sort of
weird but
these are just byproducts
they're things that our mind produces
due to other things which we're going to
get into so it's sort of like you know
if i think about how do i deal with fear
dealing with fear is not i don't want to
deal with the emotion i want to deal
with like the associations that create
the fear
so let's say i get afraid every time i'm
in a social situation
that fear is the consequence of
something else in my mind right there's
something else so either
some scar but in this case the real
thing is a hum
god or ego so i want you to understand
that the problem here
when we talk about core shame okay
because even this person describes it as
core shame
it's not just an emotion because
emotions come and go
do you guys get that so like this is
something neuroscience-wise
emotions equilibriate and this is this
this is really sad that they really do
okay so if we think about we think about
bridezillas
right so the bridezilla is like i want
everything in my wedding to be perfect
they want everything they're going to
spend so much money everyone's going to
be perfect
it's gonna be my perfect day
so if you create the perfect day and you
destroy your relationships and you spend
so much money
and everything is perfect how long do
you stay happy
how long does the happiness last if it
was a little bit more perfect
would the happiness last 40 years if it
was a little bit less perfect would it
last 30 years
so the truth of the matter is that
emotions equilibriate it's just how our
brain is designed
even major depressive disorder and
depressive episodes
tend to be generally speaking time
limited
so the evidence suggests that even if
you're depressed that that depression
will go away over time
okay if you're angry it'll go away over
time
so what where does core shame come from
so it's not actually an emotion it is
something that
continuously creates or triggers emotion
that's the difference and where core
shame comes from is the ego
so the ahamkar is continuously creating
new shame and so then you ask the
question okay what is the ahamkar what
is the ego
it's a sense of identity and as long as
this sense of identity persists
it will continuously
increase your shame it's like a shame
generating
factory right because the shame is just
the emotion like you can the emotion
will go away on its own
if you're someone who's dealing with
core shame what you really need to
understand
is what is the identity structure that
creates the shame okay
so i hope that that makes sense and so
now this person is asking how does core
shame become implanted in our mind what
i would say becomes implanted as a sense
of self
that is shameful and now we can even see
so the person sort of says i don't know
exactly where this comes from but i felt
this way my whole life
so when this person says things like oh
i i've been feeling this way my whole
life like i don't understand
you know it's not it's been it's like
normal for me and yeah that's because
it's
you carry it around with you constantly
it's your sense of identity
so then they have another question so if
understanding the origins of our shame
can help us
overcome it and if so how yes absolutely
so what i would say is that the way that
this is going to work for you if you
want this to if you want to stop
persistently feeling ashamed of yourself
you have to dig into this identity and
as long as you
are someone who is like deserves to be
ashamed of yourself
the shame will continue and then what
you have to do is remap your identity so
i'll give you guys just another example
of this okay something i referenced a
little bit earlier i want y'all
you know i'm going to say something
that's sort of self-positive but i think
it
it illustrates the point so i want you
guys to think about the person who got
50 rejections from medical school and
then 60 rejections from medical school
and 70 rejections from medical school
ended up getting into medical school i
was really happy right i was a dude who
persevered
i overcame my weaknesses i persevered i
was like oh man i was so good
then i wound up at harvard and then i'd
really overcome my weaknesses
i'd overcome my weaknesses that's who i
was that was my identity i was first a
failure
and then i was someone who overcame
weaknesses and now
i know it sounds kind of weird but what
am i what do i want to hang on my wall
i don't want to hang the diploma from
harvard i want to hang the failures
and so now what i've come to realize is
that this was never a failure to begin
with
this is incorrect it's part of who i am
i am period that's it i am what i
am i am neither a failure nor successful
i am neither special nor worthless
i'm just me and so what i've observed
within myself
is like an interesting remapping of
identity because i know it sounds kind
of weird but like when you get into
harvard that's what you want to hang on
your res
on your wall right when you get it
framed you're like man i
i need when i was looking at my office
my ego was like well i hope there's
enough wall space for all my wonderful
diplomas
because this is ego oh look at me
i am triumphant
but you can't triumph unless you failed
these two come hand in hand so with my
identity of failure
comes my identity of triumph and now
actually what i've done is i've
crossed it all out i am that's just
it i'm neither special nor worthless
and so what you really need to do if you
want to stop this sense of shame
is to remap your identity so start to
ask yourself like
who are you okay like really like who
are you who have you become who were you
and really pay attention to like what
comes up there
and so then the last kind of question
that they've got is are there particular
physiological patterns
that might serve as helpful tools to
overcome shame absolutely we'll talk
about that in a second
and meditative approaches okay so now
if we're talking about overcoming shame
there's two elements
we got to take a two-pronged approach
one is
identity and the second is emotion
because remember even if we have the
identity it's still you're still feeling
ashamed in the moment and that makes it
hard to do things right
so we still gotta deal with that so
we're gonna deal with this one first
breath
there's other stuff you can do but let's
start with this so when you experience
an emotion
your pattern of breathing alters as a
result
and when you breathe a particular way it
alters your emotions
this is scientific fact we kind of know
this now
okay i know it sounds kind of weird but
like it's actually what happens
so i don't know if you all realize this
but in
scientific experiments when they are
testing anxiety if you're looking at a
treatment for anxiety
the way that you reproduce anxiety
in a laboratory right so if i'm testing
let's say a medication for anxiety
what i need is a lab full of like
anxious people
so how do i create all of these people
and how do i induce anxiety in the
moment
what i do is increase the co2
concentration
that they inhale this literally is the
scientific
standard for creating anxiety in another
human being for research purposes
so you give them a gas mask that has a
higher level of co2 concentration
it's it's wild that's like literally
what you do i hope it's
increase maybe it's decreased i know
it's 7.5 percent can someone check
whether atmospheric if that's lower that
or higher than atmospheric concentration
i'm pretty sure it's 7.5
co2 and so it's interesting because you
can literally induce an emotion by
altering
the co2 and oxygen concentration of what
you breathe
so breathe so i guess that shame has a
relatively
deep and rapid breathing pattern okay
i'm not so sure that it's actually
shallow but if you alter your breath
your mind will change with it
so what i would recommend is nari shuddi
that's our go-to and it's a go-to for a
reason
if you want to do something a little bit
stronger you can do ohm chanting
and just chant the shame out right
just let it out and you can be like oh
my god that's so embarrassing
i'd feel like an idiot yes exactly and
just chant through it
we'll practice that today okay so that's
what i would do so in the moment this is
how you physiologically handle shame
next thing identity what do we do about
that so this is where there's a lot of
stuff
um you know we can talk about i think uh
once again the atman
like there's a reason why the dr k's
guide is what it is chad it's because
like most of the stuff is in there
so if we think about you know who are
you and why do you deserve to be ashamed
of yourself
like why are you deserving of shame so
there's dealing with the actual emotion
but i would ask yourself the question
why do you deserve
to be ashamed and then i would ask
yourself you know how long
have you deserved
to be ashamed and i'd really pay
attention there
and then the third question is what
happened
right to take a look at like you know
remember when you were five years old
were you ashamed of yourself and then
when you were eight years old were you
ashamed of yourself and you'll say yes
okay so what happened between five and
eight you may not be able to uncover
anything
but then i know it sounds kind of weird
this is tough it requires some
introspection and if you do these
these practices regularly over time
this part will become easier then what i
would do when you
experience the shame and this is kind of
when to how to tie it together so
in a moment of shame i would ask
yourself one last question
which is are you someone that deserves
to be ashamed right now
or are you ashamed right now i know it
sounds kind of weird but like think
about the identity versus the
circumstance
and what you'll discover is that there
is a part of your mind
that basically assumes that you should
be ashamed
okay so now someone is saying
five-year-olds don't deserve shame
okay but i want you all to understand
this when you don't deserve
something and it happens to you anyway
that is what rewires your perception of
what is deserved
do you guys get that like that is it in
a nutshell
that's where the core comes from when i
don't deserve
something and it happens anyway it
reprograms my understanding
of what is deserved and what is not
deserved
and then i carry that programming
through life
which is where you carry the identity of
shame
so that's where you have to go back
and remap it figure out oh this
fundamental principle which i have grown
up with
like gravity like do you guys get that
when you're five years old
you're understanding you're laying down
the cement
to understand gravity in
social interactions an identity a one
month old doesn't know who they are they
don't have the capacity to know who they
are
the five-year-old just sort of knows on
a broad sense whether i'm good or i'm
bad
have i been a bad boy or have i been a
good boy and when some things happened
to me that like
i'm just playing with my blocks when dad
comes over
hits me upside the head because i'm
playing with my blocks
oh boy is playing with my blocks bad no
because i play with my blocks at school
so how do i explain that oh it must be
me
kids play with blocks all the time i saw
these look at all these commercials
where people are playing with blocks why
am i getting it it must be
me and it changes the idea of what you
deserve
and then you carry the idea forward that
you deserve to be ashamed so you have to
go back
and re-examine that right and recognize
and this is really emotionally painful
by the way
liberating painful and we've done this
on stream a lot right like
i'd say the who's the there's the guy
who's in the cult
where like i i encourage y'all to watch
that and there was the other guy who
hadn't cried in a long time he's tired
of crying
he doesn't need to cry anymore watch
that one too
but i think it's like these people were
taught that this is what they deserve
this is your lot in life
and so you have to go back and hopefully
you know you can do it to a certain
degree on your own you can absolutely do
it in therapy like some of our coaches
can probably handle this kind of stuff
actually a lot of them can it's
something we deal with a lot
and then the other thing is it doesn't
have to be through that right like you
can just grow as a human being and begin
to realize like i did that like i was
never a failure and i was never a
success
the whole paradigm is incorrect there's
no such thing as either one
right like it's just i am what i am
and i have just as much reason to be
proud of
of all of my rejection letters as i do
of my diploma
right like the rest of it the shame and
the failure and crap like that that's
all crap that my mind
creates it's not real and once you kind
of realize that then it changes who you
are that's how you remap your identity
you